::: {.breakout}

#### Next steps for FDO {#sec:next-step-fdo}

The FAIR Digital Object Forum [@{https://fairdo.org/}] working groups are preparing more detailed [requirement documents](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1O1PTLmVWqjQgvJsIcPgaZJe9BntHZt8_QndEG0eRwUY/edit) setting out the path for realising FDOs, named _FDO Recommendations_. As of 2022-05-13, these documents are in draft stage, undergoing internal review, meanwhile the FDO Forum is formalising the process for maturing and making these recommendations open for public review. As these drafts clarify the future aims and focus of FAIR Digital Objects, we provide their brief summaries below:

<!-- TODO 
 
Update below for new FDO Proposed Recommendation (PR)s due 2022-07-30:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1O1PTLmVWqjQgvJsIcPgaZJe9BntHZt8_QndEG0eRwUY/edit


PED-DOIPEndorsement-1.0-20220608 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1me0L8C5yDe39cYP1Sxud4Y10hxhphOimLB-K-KgHQUk/edit

PEN-FDO-Upload-1.0-20220608
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1fDR5VHbVIa2AbLsBR58idrfn_Ib3x6Fk-_LJ4c_Ftt4/edit

PR-TypingFDOs-2.0-20220608
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1X0hcOVIqP7iYIJf9u-7x3RwcXK8ecsauy0FZg_6-Bg0/edit

PR-Granularity-2.0-20220608
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1u4bpbwW0-UH-jLJmCOUoww5iF78vSKm1CLeA3LA-_B8/edit

PR-PIDProfileAttributes-2.0-20220608
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c2mZziq5pIPmLxMHLcYqlWrjYsc2ezGMXvp0E46iljo/edit

PR-ConfigurationTypes-2.0-20220608
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ivvg3C_QWSO9PIQwkKT89xG4fBhNAs7_6b0Dz11EwDg/edit

PR-MachineActionDef-2.0-20220611
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GHFPAUGpNvYaxctkx-CpvY1vKf_aGZpSlWGOWvyXSiQ/edit
-->

The **FDO Forum Document Standards** [@WD-DocProcessStd-1.1-20220129] documents the recommendation process within the forum, starting at _Working Draft_ (WD) status within the closed working group and later within the open forum, then _Proposed Recommendation_ (PR) published for public review, finalised as _FDO Forum Recommendation_ (REC) following any revisions. In addition, the forum may choose to _endorse_ existing third-party notes and specifications.

The **FDO Requirement Specifications** [@WD-RequirementSpec-1.0-20220317] is an update of [@bonino_2019] as the foundational definition of FDO. This sets the criteria for classifying an digital entity as a FAIR Digital Object, allowing for multiple implementations. The requirements shown in table [tbl:fdo-checks] are largely equivalent, but here clarified with references to other FDO documents.

The **Machine actionability** [@WD-MachineActionDef-1.1-20220301] sets out to define what is meant by _machine actionability_ for FDOs. _Machine readable_ is defined as elements of bit-sequences defined by structural specification, _machine interpretable_ elements that can be identified and related with semantic artefacts, while _machine actionable_ are elements with a type with operations in a symbolic grammar. The document largely describes requirements for resolving an FDO to metadata, and how types should be related to possible operations.

**Configuration Types** [@WD-ConfigurationTypes-1.0-20220317] classifies different granularities for organising FDOs in terms of PIDs, PID Records, Metadata and bit sequences, e.g. as a single FDO or several daisy-chained FDOs. Different patterns used by current DOIP deployments are considered, as well as FAIR Signposting [@{https://signposting.org/FAIR/}]

**PID Profiles & Attributes** [@WD-PIDProfileAttributes-1.0-20220317] specifies that PIDs must be formally associated with a _PID Profile_, a separate FDO that defines attributes required and recommended by FDOs following said profile. This forms the _kernel attributes_, building on recommendations from RDA's _PID Information Types_ working group [@doi:10.15497/rda00031]. This document makes a clear distinction between a minimal set of attributes needed for PID resolution and FDO navigation, which  needs to be part of the _PID Record_, compared with a richer set of more specific attributes as part of the _metadata_ for an FDO, possibly represented as a separate FDO. 

**Granularity, Versioning, Mutability** [@WD-Granularity-1.0-20220317] considers how granularity decisions for forming FDOs must be agreed by different communities depending on their pragmatic usage requirements. The affect on versioning, mutability and changes to PIDs are considered, based on use cases and existing PID practices.

**DOIP Endorsement Request** [@PED-DOIPEndorsement-0.1-20220326] is an endorsement of the DOIP v2.0 [@handle:0.DOIP/DOIPV2.0] specification as a potential FDO implementation, as it has been applied by several institutions [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5872645]. The document proposes that DOIP shall be assessed for completeness against FDO; in this initial draft this is justified as _"we can state that DOIP is compliant with the FDO specification documents in process"_ (the documents listed above).

**Upload of FDO** [@WD-FDO-Upload-0.1-20220320] illustrates the operations for uploading an FDO to a repository, what checks it should do (for instance conformance with the PID Profile, if PIDs resolve). ResourceSync [@{http://www.openarchives.org/rs/toc}] is suggested as one type of service to list FDOs. This document highlights potential practices by repositories and their clients, but adds no particular requirements (e.g. how should failed upload checks be reported?).

**Typing FAIR Digital Objects** [@WD-TypingFDOs-1.0-20220310] defines what _type_ means for FDOs, primarily to enable machine actionability and to define an FDO's purpose. This document lays out requirements for how _FDO Types_ should themselves be specified as FDOs, and how an _FDO Type Framework_ allows organising and locating types. Operations applicable to an FDO is not predefined for a type, however operations naturally will require certain FDO types to work. How to define such FDO operations is not specified.

It is worth pointing out at that, except for the DOIP endorsement, all of these documents are abstract, in the sense that they permit any technical implementation of FDO, if used according to the recommendations.

:::
