## Discussion {#sec:discussion}



# Discussion {#sec:discussion .unnumbered}

We have evaluated the FAIR Digital Object concept using multiple
frameworks, and contrasted FDO against existing experiences from Linked
Data on the Web. In this section we discuss the implications of this
evaluation, and propose how these two approaches can be better combined.

## Framework evaluation {#framework-evaluation .unnumbered}

Having considered FDO and the Web architecture as interoperability
frameworks
([\[sec:interoperability-compare\]](#sec:interoperability-compare){reference-type="ref+page"
reference="sec:interoperability-compare"}), we observe that neither are
magic bullets, but each bring different aspects of interoperability. The
Web comes with a large degree of flexibility and openness, however this
means interoperability can suffer as services have different APIs and
data models, although with common patterns. This is also true for Linked
Data on the Web, with many overlapping ontologies and frequent
inconsistencies in resolution mechanisms; although somewhat alleviated
in recent years by schema.org becoming common metadata model for
semantic markup inline in Web pages. The Web is based on a common HTTP
protocol which has remained stable architecturally throughout its 32
years of largely backwards-compatible evolution. FDO on the other side
sets down multiple rigid rules for identifiers, types, methods etc. that
are advanterous for interoperability and predictability for FAIR
consumption. Yet there is a large degree of freedom in how the FDO rules
can be implemented by a given community, for instance there is no common
metadata model or identifier resolution mechanism, and DOIP is just one
possible transport method for FDOs, which itself does not enforce these
rules.

When evaluating FDO implementations against the FDO guidelines
([\[sec:doip-fdo-compare\]](#sec:doip-fdo-compare){reference-type="ref+page"
reference="sec:doip-fdo-compare"}) we see that several technical pieces
and community practices still need to be developed and further defined,
for instance the FDO type system, how to declare FDO actions, how to
resolve persistent identifiers, or how to know which pattern of FDO
composition is used. Achieving fully interoperable FAIR digital objects
would require further convergence on implementation practices, and it is
not given that his need to diverge from the established Web
architecture. It is not clear from FDO guidelines if moving from
HTTP/DNS to DOIP/Handle as a way to expose distributed digital objects
will benefit FAIR practitioners, when both approaches require additional
restrictions, equably implementable, such as using persistent
identifiers or pre-defining an object's type.

Considering this, by comparing FDO and Web as middleware
([\[sec:middleware\]](#sec:middleware){reference-type="ref+page"
reference="sec:middleware"}) we saw that programmatic access to digital
objects, a core promise of FDO, is not particularly improved by the use
of the protocol DOIP as compared to HTTP, e.g. lack of concurrency
transparancy. Recent updates to HTTP have added many features needed for
large-scale usage such as video streaming services (e.g. caching,
multiplexing, cloud deployments), and having the option to transparantly
apply these also to FDOs seems like a strong incentive. Many
programmatic features are however missing or needing custom extensions
in both aspects, such as transactions, asynchronous operations and
streaming.

By assessing FDO against the FAIR principles
([\[sec:fair-compare\]](#sec:fair-compare){reference-type="ref+page"
reference="sec:fair-compare"}) we found that both FDO implementations
are underspecified in several aspects (licences, provenance, data
references, data vocabularies, metadata persistence). While there are
implementations of each of these in general Linked Data examples, there
is no single set of implementation guides that fully realizes the FAIR
principles. *FAIRification* efforts like the FAIR Cookbook
[@faircookbook] and FAIR Implementation Profiles [@FIP] are bringing
existing practices together, but there remains a potential role for FDO
in giving a coherent set of implementation practices that can
practically achieve FAIR. Significant effort, also within EOSC, is now
moving towards FAIR metrics [@Devaraju_2021], which in practice need to
make additional assumptions on how FAIR principles are implemented, but
these are not always formalized [@10.5281/zenodo.7463421] nor can they
be taken to be universally correct [@10.5281/zenodo.7848102]. Given that
most of the existing FAIR guides and assessment tools are focused on Web
and Linked Data, it would be reasonable for FDO to then provide a
profile of such implementation choices that can achieve best of both
worlds.

EOSC has been largely supportive of FDO, FAIR and related services. By
contrasting the EOSC Interoperability Framework
([\[sec:eosc-interoperability-framework\]](#sec:eosc-interoperability-framework){reference-type="ref+page"
reference="sec:eosc-interoperability-framework"}) with FDO, we found
that there are important dimensions that are not solved at a technical
level, but through organization collaboration, legal requirements and
building community practices. FDO recommendations highlight community
aspects, but at the same time the largest FAIR communities in many
science domains are already producing and consuming Linked Data. Just as
the Linked Data community has a challenge in convincing more research
fields to use Semantic Web technologies, FDO currently need to build
many new communities in areas that have shown interest in that approach
(e.g. material science). It may be advantegous for both these effort to
be aligned and jointly promoted under the EOSC umbrella.

## What does FDO mean for Linked Data? {#sec:what-does-it-mean-for-linked-data .unnumbered}

The FAIR Digital Object approach raises many important points for Linked
Data practictioners. At first glance, the explicit requirements of FDOs
may seem to be easy to furfill by different parts of the Semantic Web
Cake [@SemanticWebXML2000 slide 10], as we have previously proposed
[@10.3897/rio.8.e94501]. However, this deeper investigation, based on
multiple frameworks, highlights that the openness and variability of how
Linked Data is deployed can make it difficult to achieve the FDO goals
without significant effort.

While RDF and Linked Data have been suggested as prime candidates for
making FAIR data, we argue that when different developers have too many
degrees of freedom (such as serialization formats, vocabularies,
identifiers, navigation), interoperability is hampered -- this makes it
hard for machines to reliably consume multiple FAIR resources across
repositories and data providers. Indeed, this may be one reason why the
initial FDO effort steered away from Linked Data approaches, but now
seems in a danger of opening the many same degrees of freedom within
FDO.

We therefore identify the need for a new explicit FDO profile of Linked
Data that sets pragmatic constraints and stronger recommendations for
consistent and developer-friendly deployment of digital objects. Such a
combination of efforts will utillise both the benefits of mature
Semantic Web technologies (e.g. federated knowledge graph queries and
rich validation) and data management practices that follow FDO guidance
in order to grow a rigid (yet flexible) ecosystem of machine-actionable
scholarly objects. It is beyond the scope of this work to detail such a
profile, but its main priorities could be:

-   Use HTTP(S) as protocol
-   Use URIs as identifiers, with persistent identifier promises
-   Provide consistent identifier resolution that does not require
    heuristics
-   Common core metadata model
-   References are always URIs, and should be persistent identifiers
-   Types, attributes and actions are self-defined by their identifier

The FAIR and Linked Data communities likewise need to recognize the need
for simpler, more pragmatic approaches that make it easier for FAIR
practitioners to adapt the technologies with \"just enough\" semantics.
We have previously proposed the combination of RO-Crate
[@10.3233/ds-210053] and Signposting
[@vandesompelFAIRSignpostingProfile2022] as a mean to implement FDO
[@10.3897/rio.8.e93937] over HTTP using a common Linked Data metadata
model.

However it may be sufficient to use HTTP-based FAIR Signposting alone to
achieve the above list, if one considers only a small metadata model,
and rather reference from the signposting which metadata resources are
additionally available. This will allow any Linked Data resource to
gradually participate in the FDO ecosystem, with minimal effort and
non-intrusive implementation changes. FDO implementations like Cordra
typically already use HTTP APIs that align with DOIP [@DOIPAPIHTTPa],
these can be augmented with Signposting headers without necessarily
moving to a Linked Data metadata model.

<!-- Leave out

## Simplifying the Semantic Web Architecture

* [@10.1007/978-3-540-68234-9_22] updating Semantic Web Architeture
* [@10.3991/ijet.v10i5.4754] ?

Kingsley Uyi Idehen points out that the traditional Semantic Web Cake has a serious flaw in implying that XML is a requirement and points out that the Semantic Web is *not* distinct from the World Wide Web [@{https://medium.com/openlink-software-blog/semantic-web-layer-cake-tweak-explained-6ba5c6ac3fab}] . 

Below we reconsider the Semantic Web Architecture as updated by Kingsley, and simplify it with the most obvious technical choices as of 2022 to align it with the main FDO requirements:

* Semantic Web of Linked Data: Use HTTP 1.1 or newer. HTTP resolution of PID must redirect to JSON-LD, optionally via a HTML landing page with FAIR Signposting link headers.
* Document Type: Use JSON-LD 1.1 or newer. `@context` must resolve by versioned PID[^schemapid]. Use flattened, compacted profile of JSON-LD for consistent JSON.
* Sentence Part identifiers: Use PIDs and `#`-fragments of PIDs, allowing other URLs for non-FDO references. Use DOIs or Handle
* Abstract language: Use a single graph. Explicitly declare `@type` and `s:name` of all subjects.
* Query: Use SPARQL 1.1 or newer.
* Dictionary: Use `https://schema.org/` as base vocabulary, extend using PID to vocabularies in SKOS. 
* Rules: Use SHACL Core in JSON-LD
* Transmission: Always use TLS and `https://` URIs (including in new PIDs[^schemahttps]). Use services like Let's Encrypt for ad-hoc certificates.

[^schemapid]: Note that while schema.org's JSON-LD examples frequently use `"@context": "https://schema.org"` this is not a versioned PID (not even a complete URI). While releases of this particular vocabulary strive to not break backward compatibility, we suggest using for instance <https://schema.org/version/14.0/schemaorg-current-https.jsonld> or an indirect w3id 

[^schemahttps]: The schema.org JSON-LD context used `http` PIDs since 2011, with a gradual transition to `https`, see [schemaorg/schemaorg#2853](https://github.com/schemaorg/schemaorg/issues/2853) and [schemaorg/schemaorg#2886](https://github.com/schemaorg/schemaorg/issues/2886)

As technological improvements to Semantic Web continue, and FDO requirements mature, this FDO-LD profile will need to be regularly revised, for instance every 3 years.

-->
